## Write a Lex Program to count the number of vowels and consonants in a given string.

```lex
%{
int vow, con, printf(const char*, ...);
%}
%%
[aeiou] {printf("Current vowel = %s\n", yytext);
vow++;}
[bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz] {printf("Current consonant = %s\n", yytext);
con++;}
\n return 0;
%%
int yywrap(void){}
int main (void)
{
yylex();
printf("vowels = %d, consonants = %d\n", vow,con);
}
```

### Explanation

- The ` %{}` section at the beginning of the code defines some variables and functions that will be used later on. Specifically, it defines two integer variables called "vow" and "con", and a function called "printf" that will be used to output information to the console.

- The %% section defines the rules for the lexer (Lex) portion of the program. This section uses regular expressions to match patterns in the input file. In this case, there are two patterns: one for vowels and one for consonants. Whenever a match is found, the corresponding action is executed. 
- For example, if a vowel is found, the program will output a message to the console indicating that a vowel was found, and it will increment the "vow" variable. Similarly, if a consonant is found, the program will output a message to the console indicating that a consonant was found, and it will increment the "con" variable.
-  Finally, if a newline character is found, the lexer will return 0, which signals to the parser (Yacc) that the input file has been completely read.

- The next section defines a function called "yywrap", which is used to signal to the parser that the end of the input file has been reached. In this case, the function simply returns.

- Finally, the "main" function calls the "yylex" function to begin the lexing process. Once the input file has been completely read, the program outputs the final counts of vowels and consonants to the console using the "printf" function.

### What are rules in Lex?

Rules in Lex are used to define the tokens that will be recognized by the lexer. Each rule consists of a regular expression and an action. The regular expression is used to match a pattern in the input file, and the action is executed whenever a match is found.

```
%%
[aeiou] {printf("Current vowel = %s\n", yytext);
vow++;}
[bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz] {printf("Current consonant = %s\n", yytext);
con++;}
\n return 0;
%%
```

- The first pattern `[aeiou] {printf("Current vowel = %s\n", yytext);
vow++;}` matches **any lowercase vowel** character. When a match is found, the corresponding action is executed, which is to print a message to the console using the "printf" function. The message includes the string "Current vowel = " and the matched character string "yytext". The "yytext" variable holds the matched string, which in this case would be a single vowel character. Finally, the "vow" variable is incremented to keep track of the total number of vowels found in the input text.

- The second pattern `[bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz] {printf("Current consonant = %s\n", yytext);
con++;}` matches **any lowercase consonant character**. When a match is found, the corresponding action is executed, which is to print a message to the console using the "printf" function. The message includes the string "Current consonant = " and the matched character string "yytext". The "yytext" variable holds the matched string, which in this case would be a single consonant character. Finally, the "con" variable is incremented to keep track of the total number of consonants found in the input text.

The last pattern **\n matches a newline character**. When a match is found, the corresponding action is executed, which is to return 0. This signals to the parser that the input file has been completely read, and the program can exit.

### What is the purpose of the yywrap function?

The yywrap function is used to signal to the parser that the end of the input file has been reached. In this case, the function simply returns.

### What is the purpose of the main function?

The main function calls the yylex function to begin the lexing process. Once the input file has been completely read, the program outputs the final counts of vowels and consonants to the console using the printf function.

### What is the purpose of the yytext variable?

The yytext variable holds the matched string. In this case, it would be a single vowel or consonant character.

### What is the purpose of the vow and con variables?

The vow and con variables are used to keep track of the total number of vowels and consonants found in the input text.

### How do you compile and run a Lex program from the terminal on Linux?

To compile a Lex program, use the following command:

```bash
lex <filename>.l
```

This will generate a file called "lex.yy.c". To compile the generated file, use the following command:

```bash
gcc lex.yy.c -ll
```

This will generate an executable file called "a.out". To run the program, use the following command:

```bash
./a.out
```

